ANDANTE IN C MAJOR FOR FLUTE AND ORCHESTRA KV. 315
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart (1756-1791)

This edition is based on the Breitkopf & Haertel print of the score
(1880s), the so-called "Alte Mozart Ausgabe". The B&H score lacks any
information about the source texts, but it is likely they used the
original autograph.  I simplified the parts for the two oboi and two
french horns in the complete score, where the each pair share the same
staff.  For instance, slurs are never duplicated in the two voices.
On the other side, the solo parts reproduce the unabriged original
text.

    The autograph does not state the date nor the place of
composition, but it was probably composed when Mozart visited Mannheim
in 1778.  According to a number of scholars, it is likely this piece
was written as a replacement for the "Adagio ma non troppo" in the
Flute Concerto in G Major KV. 313.  This work was commissioned by a
certain De Jean, a rich Hollander merchant and amateur flautist, for
whom Mozart composed (transcribed?) the famous Concerto in D Major
KV. 314 and some flute quartets as well.

    Supposing this theory is true, De Jean's dislike for the original
Adagio could be justified by the fact it was too far beyond his
skills, and by the too preminent role of the orchestra.  The two
pieces are quite different both in length (the original Adagio lasts
about 10 minutes, twice the time of this new Andante) and in the
importance of the orchestra: while in the original movement it has a
very prominent role, in this Andante simply supports the solo.  The
two pieces share the same orchestration (strings, two oboi and two
french horns) and the structure (sonata form without repeats).

    This would not be the first case in Mozart's career he was forced
to substitute one movement in a concerto by the soloist.  It is a well
documented fact (letter by Leopold Mozart dated October 9, 1777) that
when Mozart wrote the Violin Concerto nr. 5 KV. 219 (1776) for Antonio
Brunetti, he was asked to remove the splendid original "Adagio"
because Brunetti defined it "too much affected", and replaced it with
the simpler Adagio KV. 261.


Maurizio Tomasi, August 2003.
